In this lesson we will learn how to use custom fonts in our web pages.
So for example we as designers may have fonts installed on our computers that we love and we may want
to use those fonts in our web pages.
However if a visitor of our Web site does not also have that font installed they will not see that font
.
And instead their web browser will fall back to use a system default font.
Well in this lesson we will learn how to sidestep that limitation by embedding font files into our web
pages in a way that browsers can easily download and use.
And this will allow us to use any font in our web pages that we have the proper licensing to use.
Let's get started.
There are different approaches to embedding font files into your pages but I think they can all be broken
down into two categories.
The first category we will call hosted solutions.
Examples of this would be Adobe's type kid or Google fonts.
These services will provide you with a code snippet that you can copy and then paste into the header
section of your website.
These services will do all of the heavy lifting and the code that they give you to paste into your head
section will reference files that live on their server.
So then literally all that you will need to do is use the font name in your font family CSSA declarations
.
Now these hosted font solutions are so easy to use.
We're not going to cover them in this lesson because really there's nothing to review.
Now the second category we will call self-hosted fonts.
This is where the font files live on our server and we need to manage those files and link to those
files in our CSSA code.
It's a little bit more tricky.
So the rest of this lesson is going to be reviewing that process.
Let's dive right in.
There is a font named P-T sans that I enjoy using in my designs is a freely available font and its license
lets anyone use it on their pages.
So I downloaded the P-T Sans font from a Web site named squirrel.
Now typically when you download a font it will include a regular version a bold version and italic version
and a bold italic version.
Let's begin with the regular non ball non italic version.
Now you can see that there are four files and you may be wondering why isn't there just one file.
All four of these are the same exact identical font however different web browsers and different devices
need different formats.
So we can see that these four files have the same name Peetie hyphen sand's but this one ends in EOT
.
This one ends in Dot SVG dot TTF dot WOFF.
So if you have a font that you're licensed to use and let's imagine that you only have the TTL version
you'll need to find a web font generator that can automatically convert that file into all of these
different formats.
I recommend you perform a web search for Fonte squirrel and then look for the web font generator page
.
So once we've chosen a font and we have the four most popular file formats for the font we need to move
these files into the same folder as were our Web page libs.
So this is where our example page lives index dot HTML.
This is the example page we've seen in earlier lessons and we know that we have a CSSA folder with our
CSSA file.
Now in order to stay organized I'm going to create a folder within our CSSA folder named fonts and I'm
going to move over the P-T Sans font files in to this newly created fonts folder with these files in
place.
Let's hop over to the text editor and begin writing a bit of CSSA code so I will create a commented
section to stay organized.
Custom fonts
so all of our custom font code will be placed between this line and this line.
So the first thing we're going to do is include the at sign and then font face.
Now this code syntax looks like a typical CSSA rule that we've seen in the course.
However this is not a traditional selector.
We're not selecting anything on the page to style.
Instead we are defining a font so within the brackets will save font family Peetie sans or whatever
the name of your font is on the next line of code source.
This is where we point the web browser to those font files that we just moved in to the newly created
Fonts folder.
The first file that I will link to is the wharf that w o f f extension because it's the most upcoming
emerging fund standard so I'll copy and paste the names that have having to remember the exact spelling
you Arel quotes.
We will begin by typing the name of the folder that we know the file lives in.
We know that it lives in the fonts subfolder so fonts and then forward slash and them will paste in
the name of the file.
Then outside of these parentheses will say format and we know that the format is was.
Finally we know that this is not the bulled or the Italic version.
This is just the normal standard version so will say font weight is normal and font style is not italic
but just normal with this code in place and with the font file in place we can now use this font name
PT Sans in our CSS So our body element is currently telling the page to use the George Afon which we
can see here.
But let's remove this and take our PT Sans font for a spin Peetie Sans.
If that's not available for some reason maybe the download fails we'll use Arial.
If that's not available we use the system default sand Serrefine Now before we see even refresh.
I should point out that this code where we're defining the font and pointing to the font files.
This should actually be placed before we reference the font name.
So I'm just going to cut and paste that code to sit at the top of our stylesheet.
So if we save and refresh we can see that the browser is now successfully using the custom font.
However our job is not complete because even though this font will work in the newest version of Firefox
and the newest version of chrome older browsers and other touchscreen devices will not be able to load
the W O F F version.
So this is where the code gets a little bit trickier.
We now need to link to these other three formats as well.
In our code.
So instead of boring you with this code I'm just going to paste it in and explain it.
We now have two source declarations the first simply links to the OT version of the font and this is
for Internet Explorer 9.
Our second source declaration has paths to all four font formats so this will work in older versions
of Internet Explorer.
This is the WAF version that will work in the latest browsers and devices TGF which will work in slightly
older devices and SPG which will work for certain touchscreen or mobile devices.
Now in this second sort declaration where we're linking to multiple formats after we're done pointing
the browser to one file we simply include a comma and then we can link to the next file so on and so
forth.
So we now have rock solid support for this font.
This will work in the widest range of browsers and devices.
However we will only set up the regular version of the fun.
What if we want the font to be bold or italic.
You will see in the page that the web browser is trying to make the text bold here.
It's trying to make the text italic here and it's trying to make the text both bold and italic here
but if you zoom in and look very closely you can tell that it doesn't look quite right.
This is because the web browser is trying to use the base regular font and it's artificially manipulating
the font to be bold or italic.
That's not ideal.
We want to provide a dedicated font file that a font designer has created to appear bold or to appear
italic.
So all we need to do is add additional font face rules in our stylesheet for the different bold and
italic variations.
First let's add the bold font.
So here are our font files that are in the website directory.
Here are all of the font files that we downloaded.
So here's the bold folder.
So I'm just going to move over the bold files and all the different formats.
Now we need a link to those new bulled files in our stylesheet.
So will create a new font face rule font family.
We want to be the exact same name PTSans only. We're going to include different source files.
Now now instead of boring you by typing in all of this code I'm going to paste in a bit of code and
it's simply pointing to the new bold files that we just moved into the folder.
Now the key to our new rule is to make sure that we specify that this is font weight.
Bold and font style normal so this font face rule is very similar to the first one that we created except
for pointing towards different files that are the bold files and then we're specifying that it's bold
but not italic.
So now if we save and refresh.
I want you to look very closely to this text that I'm highlighting now through a video file you may
not be able to see the difference or the change might have been very subtle but believe me if you're
using a high quality screen to view web page you will see the difference.
The font is much smoother and it's a very beautiful board effect.
So all that remains now is that we need to do the same thing for italic and bold italic text so all
that I'm going to do is find the place that we download the files to and I'm just going to move over
the files for italic and move over the files for bold italic.
So this folder is quite messy and clean it up a bit.
So now we're just going to head over to our CSSA and create two additional font based rules one for
italic and one for bold italic font face.
I will paste in the source lines in just a moment but let's get the skeleton set up first.
Font family.
We want the same name PT Sans font weight normal but font style italic and then we want one that is
both font weight.
Bold and font style italic.
So at this point now I will just paste in the relevant source lines.
Here are the lines for the italic and here are the lines for the bold italic.
So if we save and refresh pay attention to this text and this text they look quite a bit better.
And that concludes the process of embedding custom fonts into your style sheets.
Feel free to apply custom fonts however you see fit.
Maybe you want to leave a traditional font like Arial for the base line text and then only use your
custom fonts for headings.
It's up to you.
You are also free to include as many different custom fonts as you would like.
However I will include the two following morning's number one.
The more font files you embed the longer it will take your visitors to download all of the files and
number two.
Many a wide graphic designers have gone on the record to say that the fewer fonts you use in the design
the better.
But there is no objective right or wrong way to approach typography.
Have fun and I will see you in the next lesson